# Contributing Guide

## Build system

We are using `bazel` as the build system.

### Installation

#### Bazel

Install bazel, if not already done:

```sh
# This installs bazelisk in ~/go/bin/bazelisk
go install github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk@latest
```

Add shortcut in your `~/.bashrc` (or equivalent):

```sh
if [ -f ~/go/bin/bazelisk ]; then
  alias bazel=~/go/bin/bazelisk
fi
```

#### Buildifier

This tool helps auto-formatting `BUILD.bazel` file. Installation is similar:

```sh
go install github.com/bazelbuild/buildtools/buildifier@latest
```

Add shortcut in your `~/.bashrc` (or equivalent):

```sh
if [ -f ~/go/bin/buildifier ]; then
  alias buildifier=~/go/bin/buildifier
fi
```

Note: You may need to configure your editor to run this on save.

### Build

To build the package, run:

```shell
> bazel build --config=build //:wheel
```

`bazel` can be run from anywhere under the monorepo and it can accept absolute path or a relative path. For example,

```sh
snowml> bazel build :wheel
```

You can build an entire sub-tree as:

```sh
> bazel build --config=build //snowflake/...
```

### Notes when you add new target in a `BUILD.bazel` file

+ Instead of using `py_binary`, `py_library` and `py_test` rule from bazel, use those from `bazel/py_rules.bzl`.
  Example, instead of

  ```starlark
  py_library(
      name="my_lib",
      srcs=["my_lib.py"],
    )
  ```

  use the following instead

  ```starlark
  load("//bazel:py_rules.bzl", "py_library")

  py_library(
      name="my_lib",
      srcs=["my_lib.py"],
    )
  ```

+ When using a `genrule` rule whose tool is a `py_binary`, use `py_genrule` from `bazel/py_rules.bzl` instead.
  Example, instead of

  ```starlark
  py_binary(
      name="my_tool",
      srcs=["my_tool.py"],
    )

  genrule(
      name="generate_something",
      cmd="$(location :my_tool)",
      tools=[":my_tool"]
  )
  ```

  use the following instead

  ```starlark
  load("//bazel:py_rules.bzl", "py_binary", "py_genrule")

  py_binary(
      name="my_tool",
      srcs=["my_tool.py"],
    )

  py_genrule(
      name="generate_something",
      cmd="$(location :my_tool)",
      tools=[":my_tool"]
  )
  ```

+ If the visibility of the target is not `//visibility:public`, you need to make sure your target is visible to
  `//bazel:snowml_public_common` to make sure CI type checking work.

### Type-check

#### mypy

We use [mypy](https://mypy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) to type-check our Python source files. mypy is integrated into our
 bazel environment.

The version of MyPy is specified in `conda-env.yml`, just like other conda
packages we depend on.

#### Invoke MyPy locally

```sh
bazel build --config=typecheck <your target>
```

Or you could run

```sh
./ci/type_check/type_check.sh -b <path_to_bazel>
```

You only need to specify `-b <path_to_bazel>` if your `bazel` is not in `$PATH` or is an alias.

### Test

Similar to `bazel build`, `bazel test` can test any target. The target must be
a test target. It will run the target and report if `PASSED` or `FAILED`. It essentially `build`s the target and then
`run` it. You can also build and run separately.

TIP: If a test fails, there will be a log file, which is executable. You do not need to open via `less` or `editor`. You
 can directly paste the path in command line.

Integration tests are configured to run against an existing Snowflake account. To run tests locally, make sure that you
have configured a SnowSQL `config` file in `<HOME_DIR>/.snowsql/config` (see Snowflake
[documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/snowsql-config) for configuration options).

For example, to run all autogenerated tests locally:

```sh
# Then run all autogenerated tests
bazel test //... --test_tag_filters=autogen
```

### Coverage

A `lcov` coverage report can be generated by running

```sh
bazel coverage --combined_report=lcov <target pattern>
```

To get a human-readable report:

```sh
lcov --list $(bazel info output_path)/_coverage/_coverage_report.dat
```

To get an HTML report:

```sh
genhtml --output <output_dir> "$(bazel info output_path)/_coverage/_coverage_report.dat"
```

Both `lcov` and `genhtml` are part of the [`lcov`](https://github.com/linux-test-project/lcov) project. To install it
on MacOS:

```sh
brew install lcov
```

The unit test coverage report is generated periodically by a GitHub
[workflow](https://github.com/snowflakedb/snowflake-ml-python/actions/workflows/continuous_build.yml?query=branch%3Amain).
You can download the report in the artifacts generated by the action runs.

### Run

Another useful command is, `bazel run`. This builds and then run the built target directly. Useful for binaries while debugging.

### Other commands

`bazel` is pretty powerful and has lots of other commands. Read more [here](https://bazel.build/run/build).

### Python dependencies

To introduce a third-party Python dependency, first check if it is available as a package in the
[Snowflake conda channel](https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/snowflake/). Then modify
[requirements.yml](https://github.com/snowflakedb/snowflake-ml-python/blob/main/requirements.yml), and run the following
 to re-generate all requirements files, including
[conda-env.yml](https://github.com/snowflakedb/snowflake-ml-python/blob/main/conda-env.yml):

```sh
bazel run --config=pre_build //bazel/requirements:sync_requirements
```

Then, your code can use the package as if it were "installed" in the Python environment.

### Adding a new dependencies

Please provide the following fields when adding a new record:

#### Package Name Fields

`name`: The name of the package. Set this if the package is available with the same name and is required in both `PyPI`
and `conda`.

`name_pypi`: The name of the package in `PyPI`. Set this only to indicate that it is available in `PyPI` only. You can
also set this along with `name_conda` if the package has different names in `PyPI` and `conda`.

`name_conda`: The name of the package in `conda`. Set this only to indicate that it is available in `conda` only. You
can also set this along with `name_pypi` if the package has different names in `PyPI` and `conda`.

(At least one of these three fields should be set.)

#### Development Version Fields

`dev_version`: The version of the package to be pinned in the dev environment. Set this if the package is available
with the same version and is required in both `PyPI` and conda.

`dev_version_pypi`: The version from `PyPI` to be pinned in the dev environment. Set this only to indicate that it is
available in `PyPI` only. You can also set this along with `dev_version_conda` if the package has different versions in
`PyPI` and `conda`.

`dev_version_conda`: The version from `conda` to be pinned in the dev environment. Set this only to indicate that it is
available in `conda` only. You can also set this along with `dev_version_pypi` if the package has different versions in
`PyPI` and `conda`.

(At least one of these three fields should be set.)

`require_gpu`: Set this to true if the package is only a requirement for the environment with GPUs.

#### Snowflake Anaconda Channel

`from_channel`: Set this if the package is not available in the Snowflake Anaconda Channel
(<https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/snowflake>).

#### Version Requirements Fields (for `snowflake-ml-python` release)

`version_requirements`: The version requirements specifiers when this requirement is a dependency of the
`snowflake-ml-python` release. Set this if the package is available with the same name and required in both `PyPI` and
`conda`.

`version_requirements_pypi`: The version requirements specifiers when this requirement is a dependency of the
`snowflake-ml-python` release via `PyPI`. Set this only to indicate that it is required by the `PyPI` release only. You
can also set this along with `version_requirements_conda` if the package has different versions in `PyPI` and `conda`.

`version_requirements_conda`: The version requirements specifiers when this requirement is a dependency of the
`snowflake-ml-python` release via `conda`. Set this only to indicate that it is required by the `conda` release only.
You can also set this along with `version_requirements_pypi` if the package has different versions in `PyPI` and `conda`.

(At least one of these three fields must be set to indicate that this package is a dependency of the release. If you
don't want to constrain the version, set the field to an empty string.)

#### Extras Tags and Tags

`requirements_extra_tags`: Set this to indicate that the package is an extras dependency of `snowflake-ml-python`. This
requirement will be added to all extras tags specified here, and an `all` extras tag will be auto-generated to include
all extras requirements. All extras requirements will be labeled as `run_constrained` in conda's meta.yaml.

`tags`: Set tags to filter some of the requirements in specific cases. The current valid tags include:

+ `deployment_core`: Used by model deployment to indicate dependencies required to execute model deployment code
  on the server-side.
+ `build_essential`: Used to indicate the packages composing the build environment.

Example:

```yaml
- name: pandas
  name_pypi: pandas-pypi-name
  dev_version: 1.2.0
  dev_version_pypi: 1.2.0-pypi
  version_requirements: ">=1.0.0"
  version_requirements_pypi: ">=1.0.0"
  from_channel: "conda-forge"
  requirements_extra_tags:
    - pandas
  tags:
    - deployment_core
    - build_essential
```

### Using optional dependencies

By default, tests are running in an environment without any optional dependencies (dependencies with
`requirements_extra_tags` set). This is to reduce the number of the packages in the environments to make it less likely
to conflict with each other. To use optional dependencies in tests or binary, you need to specify
`optional_dependencies` in your `py_test` or `py_binary` target to include the `requirements_extra_tags` of the
dependencies. For example,

```starlark
py_test(
    name = "keras_torch_test",
    srcs = ["keras_test.py"],
    env = {
        "KERAS_BACKEND": "torch",
        "PYTORCH_ENABLE_MPS_FALLBACK": 1,
    },
    main = "keras_test.py",
    optional_dependencies = ["keras"],
    deps = [
        "//snowflake/ml/model:model_signature",
        "//snowflake/ml/model/_packager:model_packager",
        "//snowflake/ml/model/_signatures:numpy_handler",
        "//snowflake/ml/model/_signatures:utils",
    ],
)
```

If you added a new tag in `requirements_extra_tags`, you need to update `bazel/platforms/optional_dependency_groups.bzl`
to either create a new group or add your tag into existing group. Every group here will create a test environment with
corresponding optional dependencies installed to run the tests or binaries. Here are guidelines:

1. If there are tests needs multiple tags, there should be at least 1 group that has these tags.
1. Tags in the same group should not have conflicting packages.
1. Ideally, avoid too many groups and keep test numbers balanced across groups.

If you add a new group, please run the, following command to update the bazelrc file.

```sh
bazel run --config=pre_build //:sync_bazelrc
```

### Checking Package Latest Versions

The `bazel/requirements/update_version_requirements.py` script helps you check the latest available versions of
Python packages from both PyPI and Snowflake Conda repositories against your current requirements.

#### Usage

Run the script in dry-run mode to safely check latest versions without modifying files:

```bash
bazel run //bazel/requirements:update_version_requirements -- requirements.yml --dry-run
```

This will scan `requirements.yml` and show the latest version of packages and the suggest changes:

```sh
INFO: [DRY-RUN] PyPI/Conda package 'scikit-learn' latest PYPI version 1.6.1: '>=1.4,<1.6' -> '>=1.4,<2'
INFO: [DRY-RUN] PyPI/Conda package 'scikit-learn' latest Conda version 1.5.2: '>=1.4,<1.6' -> '>=1.4,<2'
```

Each line shows:

+ Package availbility (PyPI only, Conda only, or PyPI/Conda)
+ Package name (e.g., 'scikit-learn')
+ The package source (PyPI or Conda)
+ Latest version available in that source repo (e.g., '1.6.1')
+ Current version constraints in your requirements.yml (e.g., '>=1.4,<1.6')
+ Suggested version constraints ('>=1.4,<2')

If you want to apply all the suggested changes, run the following command to update the `requirements.yml` file

```sh
bazel run //bazel/requirements:update_version_requirements -- requirements.yml
```

## Unit Testing

Write Python `unittest` style unit tests. Pytest is allowed, but not recommended.

### `unittest`

Use `absl.testing.absltest` as a drop-in replacement of `unittest`.

For example:

```python
# instead of
# import unittest
from absl.testing import absltest

# instead of
# from unittest import TestCase, main
from absl.testing.absltest import TestCase, main

# Call main.
if __name__ == '__main__':
  absltest.main()
```

`absltest` provides better `bazel` integration which produces a more detailed XML
test report. The test report is picked up by a Github workflow to provide a nice UI
for test results.

### `pytest`

Make each unit test file its own runnable `py_test` target and use the `main()`
function provided by `snowflake.ml.test_utils.pytest_driver`.

For example:

```python
from snowflake.ml.utils import pytest_driver

def test_case():
    assert some_feature()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    pytest_driver.main()
```

`pytest_driver` contains `bazel` integration that allows `pytest` to produce a XML
test report.

### Important Notes

When you add a new test file, you should always ensure the existence of a `if __name__ == "__main__":` block, otherwise,
 the test file will not be instructed by bazel. We have a test wrapper [here](./bazel/test_wrapper.sh) to ensure that the
test will fail if you forget that part.

## Integration test

### Test in Store Procedure

To test if your code is working in store procedure or not simply, you could work based on `CommonTestBase` in
`tests/integ/snowflake/ml/test_utils/common_test_base.py`. An example of such test could be found in
`tests/integ/snowflake/ml/_internal/file_utils_integ_test.py`.

To write a such test, you need to

1. Your test cannot have a parameter called `_sproc_test_mode`.
1. Let your test case inherit from `common_test_base.CommonTestBase`.
1. Remove all Snowpark Session creation in your test, and use `self.session` to access the session if needed.
1. If you write your own `setUp` and `tearDown` method, remember to call `super().setUp()` or
   `super().tearDown()`.
1. Decorate your test method with `common_test_base.CommonTestBase.sproc_test()`. If you want your test running in
store procedure only rather than both locally and in store procedure, set `local=False`. If you don't want to test
with caller's rights, set `test_callers_rights=False`. (Owner's rights store procedure is always tested)

### Compatibility Test

To test if your code is compatible with previous version simply, you could work based on `CommonTestBase` in
`tests/integ/snowflake/ml/test_utils/common_test_base.py`. An example of such test could be found in
`tests/integ/snowflake/ml/registry/model_registry_compat_test.py`.

To write a such test, you need to

1. Your test cannot have a parameter called `_snowml_pkg_ver`.
1. Let your test case inherit from `common_test_base.CommonTestBase`.
1. Remove all Snowpark Session creation in your test, and use `self.session` to access the session if needed.
1. If you write your own `setUp` and `tearDown` method, remember to call `super().setUp()` or
   `super().tearDown()`.
1. Write a factory method in your test class that return a tuple of a function and its parameters as a tuple. The
function will be run as a store procedure in the environment with previous version of library.

    **Note**: Since the function will be created as a store procedure, the first argument must be a Snowpark Session.
    The arguments tuple you provided via the factory method does not require to include the session object.

    **Note**: To avoid any objects from current environment affecting the result, instead of using `cloudpickle` to
    pickle the function, the function will be created as a Python file and registered as a store procedure. This means
    you cannot use any object outside of the function, and if you want to import anything, you need to import inside
    the function definition. So it would help if you make your prepare function as simple as possible.

1. Decorate your test method with `common_test_base.CommonTestBase.compatibility_test`, providing the factory method
you created in the above step, optional version range to test with, as well as additional package requirements.

## `pre-commit`

Pull requests against the main branch are subject to `pre-commit` checks. Those checks enforce the code style.

You can make sure the checks can pass by installing the `pre-commit` hooks to your local repo
([instructions](https://pre-commit.com/#installation)). Those hooks will be invoked when you commit locally,
and they fix the style violations in-place. The minimal `pre-commit` version required is `3.4.0`.

Tip: if you want to isolate those fixes, avoid the `-a` the option in `git commit`. This way the automated changes
will be unstaged changes.

### Darglint

The [darglint](https://github.com/terrencepreilly/darglint) pre-commit hook lints docstrings to make sure they
conform to the [Google style guide for docstrings](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html#38-comments-and-docstrings).
Function docstrings must contain "Args" section with input value descriptions, "Returns" section describing output, and
"Raises" section enumerating the exceptions that the function can raise. Darglint will ensure that all input args are present
in the docstring and is sensitive to whitespace (e.g. args should be indented the correct number of spaces). Refer
to the list of [darglint error codes](https://github.com/terrencepreilly/darglint#error-codes) for guidance.

## Editors

### VSCode

Here are few good plugins to use:

1. [Python](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.python)
1. [Pylance static checking](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.vscode-pylance)
1. [Bazel](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=BazelBuild.vscode-bazel)
   + You need to configure `buildifier` in settings for auto-formatting `BUILD.bazel` files
1. [Black Python Formatter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.black-formatter)
1. [Flake8 Linter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.flake8)
